---
title: "A Christmas Lecture As Wall Newspaper"
date: 2018-11-01T17:02:52+01:00
draft: false
author: "Lukas Hutter"
number: "1"
type: "day"
postUrl: "http://biotop.co/xmascal/days/01"
headerimage: "/01/xmaslecture.jpg"
call: ""
---
The weeks leading up to Christmas have always had a special appeal to many students of the natural science; mulled wine sold at every corner, an abundance of occasions to socialise, but also a distinct notion that science should not only be taught, but should actively excite people. This notion is conveyed by numerous exciting, entertaining, as well as educational Christmas lectures that leave a lasting impression.

In fact, Christmas lectures have a long tradition. Many of them are accessible to the public, and are highly popular due to their spectacular experimental demonstrations. Hence, many Christmas lectures, such as those by the London Royal Institution, have become institutions in their own right, attracting huge audiences that marvel at the many wonders presented by world-class scientists about their disciplines.

This Christmas calendar was conceived with this tradition in mind. It represents our attempt at taking science out of the lab and into the pre-Christmas buzz, and to entertain and educate. In the course of the next twenty four days, we will present a topic related to Christmas every day from a science perspective. However, today, to launch this project, the personal level and some hands-on science shall take centre stage. You're warmly invited you to join us from 4pm in our temporary office space at Gerbergasse 3 in Villach!
